---
title: 'Delete Delete Delete'
date: 2025-12-2
permalink: /posts/2025/12/blog-post-11/
tags:
  - case study
  - blog
  - ethics
  - privacy
  - data backups
  - deletion
  - data management
  - privacy

---

What does "deleting something" actually do? 

**Case Study:**  
["Complete Delete: In Practice, Clicking 'Delete' Rarely Deletes. Should it?"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/fesqymtr/release/3?readingCollection=ca73f7c0)

---

This article talks about what "deleting something" on a system actually means for the user. When most users delete a file, there is an assumption that the file is completely gone, and theres no need to worry about it anymore. But this article proceeds to describe the intricacies that come with file backup processes, file recovery programs, and other complications to the process of deleting something that the system you use introduces. 

The article poses questions for discussion that I would like to share my own thoughts on. There are 9 listed, but I am just going to be talking about 4 of them. 

1. Propose approaches for informing users of the existence of remnant data on their systems.

Excess notifications can be annoying, but I think that reminding users that upon deleting something, there is still a backup. It's useful to know for users that want to either ensure something is gone, or for the users that accidentally deleted something they shouldn't have. Even just a note saying "Hey, you deleted this, the backup will delete itself in X amount of days" would do so much to ensure transparency about what the backups can/do hold. 

2. Compare the advantages of deleting information with information permanence.

There are pros and cons to both formats. I think it's easier to just do this in a list:

**Deleting Information**
- Saves storage
- Easier to delete something sensitive or embarassing to you
- Removes clutter from your backups/system

**Information Permanence**
- Easier to recover information you didn't mean to delete
- It can be really important in a lot of U.S. legal cases. Theres a chance of recovery for destroyed evidence. 
- Restoring old versions of files that get corrupted.

Generally, I'm of the opinion that Information Permanence is honestly kinda nice. I can understand completely why people would be frustrated by a system like this. Just because I like it doesn't mean it's necessarily better, it's up to the individual. 

6. Object overwriting is a straightforward, well-understood approach for eliminating the ability to recover deleted data. However, software engineers have not made object overwriting mandatory on today’s computer systems because it would negatively impact performance and battery life. This is a decision that must be made at the system level; it cannot be made a user option. Do you think that systems should employ object overwriting, or do you think that the current approach of not overwriting is correct?

I like the current system of object overwriting. Again, I understand why people would be uncomfortable with something like this. If you want to delete something and think that it's weird that it can be pulled back, I feel like that's reasonable. I just find the current system to be practical. 

I've accidentally deleted important data a lot throughout my life. I've also had a really bad PC that would constantly bluescreen and corrupt whatever art file I was working on. Being able to grab previous versions of a file has saved me so many times. 

Generally: I just think that if I had the option to buy a laptop with the current system, or a laptop with object overwriting, I would not go with Object Overwriting. It's not something important enough to me, and I would definitely prefer the benefit of performance and battery life in the long run. 

9. ‘Redaction’ is a special kind of deletion in which specific words or sentences are removed from a document, or a portion of an image is obscured, to shield information or protect confidentiality. PDF-editing tools like Adobe Acrobat and Apple’s Preview command can redact information and leave black boxes in PDFs, but there is a long history of Microsoft Word users attempting to redact by drawing black boxes on a document with Word’s highlighter feature. Unfortunately, words obscured in this way can be easily recovered. Discuss how the design features and usability failings of these document-redaction approaches are like the issues in file deletion and how they are different.

I actually had an experience I recalled after reading this question:

I used to volunteer to transcribe images to text as a hobby. I would run into a lot of scenarios where personal identifying information needed to be redacted, that was just part of the community's rules. But upon looking at the image for an extended period of time, I would notice when people used highlighter tools instead of redactions. I could turn up my screen brightness and see what was under the redaction, completely defeating the attempt to cover it. 

The point I take away from this is oversight: you don't really think about double checking something that you removed. And it makes it incredibly easy for other people to essentially "undo" whatever you removed, either from the ability to read careless redaction, or recover a file from your machine. So even if your removal seems "good enough," it's way too easy for someone else to take advantage of it. 

---

A question I'm left with after reading this article is the relation between maintaining privacy, while also not giving people the potential to abuse that same privacy. How can we let users delete data super easily if that same data might be really important in something like a legal case. Texts are something brought up all the time. There have been multiple incidents this year *alone* where government employees have been using the messaging platform Signal. Confidential conversations cannot take place on that service by law, and it still happens. It deletes logs that are meant to stay recorded. If we make deletion even easier, I wonder if that would really be a good or bad thing.

Other than that, I don't have strong thoughts on this particular case study's topic. It's not super high on my list of concerns for my privacy. Although, I could just be cursing myself to struggle with it down the line, it's hard to say. I'd like to hear other people's thoughts on it, I guess.