---
title: 'Digital Artist crashes out over AI Image Generation (again)'
date: 2025-11-18
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - case study
  - blog
  - ethics
  - generative ai
  - ai image generation
  - artists
  - copyright
  - fair use

---

How does AI bias cause harm? Who is impacted by it?

**Case Study:**  
["ARTificial: Why Copyright Is Not the Right Policy Tool to Deal with Generative AI"](https://yalelawjournal.org/forum/artificial-why-copyright-is-not-the-right-policy-tool-to-deal-with-generative-ai)

---

I've spoken about AI image generation a *lot.* I feel a lot of frustration when talking about it, because to me, art is something that I really love. Especially digital art, as that's what I have the most practice in. 

There was an era of my life where people online saw digital art very negatively. Despite being *surrounded* by digital art and graphics on the internet, people considered digital art to be "cheating." Specifically, I remember comments about "the computer just does the work for you," failing to acknowledge the absurdity of the statement. Because digital art, for all it's tools and presets, is *still* just as much of an art form as anything else. You wouldn't call a ceramics artist a "cheater" for using an electric wheel or a pre-made stamp for their work. 

But when talking about generative AI, suddenly it's cool to let the computer do it for you? 

With that in mind, I will be the first to say I have an incredibly negative outlook on AI image generation. So even before taking a look at the article written by Micaela Mantegna, I had thoughts on the questions she poses. Still, I read through it. And I plan to compare her thoughts with my own. 

"Is training with unlicensed works a fair use, or an infringing one?"

From what I can tell in the article, it seems like Mantegna means uncopyrighted work when referring to this. Maybe I'm misunderstanding, but I'm not sure. 

Either way, I am of the belief that public domain is public domain. It becomes a problem when you carelessly use work that artists do not give **explicit permission** to use. Is it technically legal to use licensed work for AI? It's hard to say with the current state of U.S. law. Law is historically very slow at catching up to the rapid-fire rate at which technology is developed. I think personally training models are an infringement on the copyright owner's right to the reproduction of their own original work. Is that factually true? I don't know yet. 

"Should the outputs be entitled to some form of copyright protection? If so, how should we deal with AI authorship?"

Mantegna wrote a lot about what fair use is, how AI could technically be transformative to the source material, etc. One thing I felt was missing is something very important about copyright law (at least in the U.S.): The law defines an author of a copyrighted material to be a human. Under the law as it stands: AI cannot "author" something. There have been instances where people have tried filing for copyright for AI work, but of course, they were rejected. 

This ties in with another question Mantegna asks: "Are the outputs generated by GAI original or derivative works?"

I'm obviously not a lawyer. I'm a 20 year old college student, so my analysis of the law should be taken with a grain of salt: 

The reason something like photographs are copyrighted is because you need to have a minimal amount of creative intent in the work. Because prompts aren't actually part of the work itself, there is a detachment between the person asking for the image to be generated, and the computer generating it. The computer is not a tool or medium in the same way that a camera is. Because ultimately, all of the "creative decisions" are left up to the AI. 

So it's not original work, because without a basis for the AI to go off of, there would be nothing there. But saying it's a derivative work is also difficult. When you make a collage, for example, you tend to select things carefully in an attempt to create what you're envisioning. There is a intent to what you reference/use. AI doesn't use that's same sort of creative intent, because it can't. No matter how lifelike an AI chatbot may be, they're all just very complicated math equations.

In the end, you're probably better off trying to copyright your prompts instead of the image you generate. 

"Should the law treat differently the outputs of AI versus those of human authors? How would we justify such a framework without affecting the principle of 'aesthetic neutrality'? How does that fare with the definition of “creativity” as a requisite for copyrights law’s “originality” requirement?"

For this question, I want to bring up another case study that I think is very relevant: the ["Monkey selfie copyright dispute."](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monkey_selfie_copyright_dispute) I'm linking the Wikipedia article because it sums up the situation well, but there are also articles from ["npr"](https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/09/12/550417823/-animal-rights-advocates-photographer-compromise-over-ownership-of-monkey-selfie) and the court summary from ["Justia U.S. Law."](https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/ca9/16-15469/16-15469-2018-04-23.html).

Essentially what happened is that a British wildlife photographer named David Slater traveled to Indonesia to take pictures of an endangered species of monkeys. Those monkeys ended up taking some (admittedly pretty cool) selfies of themselves with his eqipment. Slater argued that he should have copyright of those images, because he engineered the situation so those photos could be taken. PETA argued that actually, the *monkeys* should have the copyright, because they made the work. 

Ultimately, because the monkeys were not human, *nobody* was able to hold copyright. Those images are now public domain. 

What I'm trying to say is that there already is a distinction between humans getting copyright, and non-humans. Non-humans can technically create the work, but because they're not human, they can't claim a copyright. And because the human didn't make it, they also cannot have the copyright. So unless the law changes specifically for AI (which I deeply, deeply doubt will happen. Maybe I'll regret this later), it does not matter how much creative intention is in the work: it is public domain. 

The primary question I'm left with after all of this is "Do you think there *is* a potential for the U.S. to establish unique copyright laws for AI?" Personally, I really don't think so. I don't see a world where it would be beneficial to something like that, considering the importance of creative intent. But I'm not the only one with opinions on the matter.  

Overall, this blog post was very cathartic for me. I have so much bottled-up frustration for AI image generators claiming they should have a right to their art, and even more so for AI image generation "contests." AI image generation is so detrimental to the environment. I don't remember which video this was in, but I remember a video from ["Kappa Kaiju "](https://www.youtube.com/c/KappaKaijuOfficial) where he equates AI art to "finding lead." Instead of using lead for where it's actually useful and not just toxic to human life, the people who found this "lead really like this lead," and decided to "sprinkle it into cereal." Not because they think it's good, but because they just don't like people. And I think that's a wonderful analogy to end this post on. 