---
title: 'AI and Creative Work Theft'
date: 2025-10-10
permalink: /posts/2025/10/blog-post-6/
tags:
  - case study
  - blog
  - ethics
  - climate change
  - environmental justice
  - e-waste
  - sustainability
---

E-waste and why it's depressing.

**Case Study:**  
["From Mining to E-waste: The Environmental and Climate Justice Implications of the Electronics Hardware Life Cycle"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?readingCollection=ca73f7c0)

---

This article goes over the consequences of hardware's life cycle. In particular, it talks about e-waste's relationship with climate change, and discusses the implications of it's sustainability. 

The article itself frames a few questions for discussion. I will be taking the time to answer 5 of time with my own thoughts. 

Q1. ["Discuss the tensions between mining for economic development and climate justice. Can they coexist? Why or why not?"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?from=14272&to=14387)

In my perspective, I am not optimistic that they can co-exist. CEOs trying to make money don't exactly seem to care about what happens to the planet after they're long dead. They won't exactly be alive to deal with the conseqences of their actions. Climate Change inititives *do* actually care about what happens to the world, which unfortunately isn't profitable. Companies want access to as many resources as possible to stay ahead of the game, we've seen this time and time again. Until Elon Musk starts donating even a mere decimal of his wealth, I don't see a world where the earth will take priority on both sides.  

Q2. ["Mining is often touted as indispensable due to the need for minerals in “green” technology. Do you think the potential benefit to climate mitigation outweighs the costs to local communities and environments? Why or why not?"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?from=14391&to=14614)

I have a very pessimistic view about this, honestly. I feel like even if green energy didn't take those resources, it would only be a matter of time before some other corporation manages to snag the rights to mine there anyway. I'd rather the resources go towards something that can *also* fix some of the problems they're causing, instead of letting some apathetic person leave a crater there. 

Q3. ["Some LCAs have revealed that many technologies that aim to decrease climate or environmental harm may not actually do so. For example, one LCA that looked at the environmental impacts of electric vehicles found that their global warming potential is almost twice that of conventional vehicles primarily due to the emissions released during the manufacturing process. This same study emphasized the importance of considering the impacts of manufacturing when conducting LCAs in order to better understand the overall environmental benefits of such technologies. What are some other products or technologies that are intended to reduce climate and environmental impacts for which you would want to conduct a complete LCA?"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?from=21701&to=22421)

I would love to see a full LCA on a lot of solar panel companies I've seen pop up. I don't know a lot about how those are made, but I'm actually curious if they require a lot of energy to manufacture. I'd also like to know more about windmills (shoutout Big Ole), I don't know how many resources those take to build. 

Q4. ["What might pose challenges to the proposed solutions to the issues surrounding e-waste? Why might certain stakeholders oppose any of the solutions?"](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?from=29145&to=29292)

Money, honestly. It's the same reason it hasn't been done already - it costs a lot of money to properly dispose of these things. It's super depressing, but theres almost no shot a company would willingly pay to dispose of something if theres a far cheaper alternative. 

Q5. ["How do the climate justice implications of e-waste relate to other social justice issues in the Global South (e.g., economic injustice, dangerous low-wage jobs, exploitation of lax environmental regulations, legacies of colonialism)? Describe connections between the climate justice issues of e-waste, manufacturing, and mining."](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/w9ht6hue/release/5?from=29296&to=29625) 

I hate that I don't have another answer, but I think it goes back to money *again*. It's cheaper to exploit the world around you than it is to pay employees. Forcing other people in poorer countries is something that has become so normalized in the history of colonization and slavery that it's become an expectation. Theres almost a disregard that people in the Global South are human too, theres just so much apathy for other people's lives when you don't have to interact with them.  

I would like to propose an additional question. Considering a lot of my discussions revolved around money, I'd like to ask something that relates to it:
"Do you think it would be realistic to force companies to pay strict fees for the emissions they produce? Do you think it would work, and how would you try to regulate it? Why would/wouldn't this work? 

In reflection, I do truly believe those who gain financial power by exploiting the earth should just suck it up and use some of their boundless wealth to fix the problems *they* caused. Do I see this happening? Absolutely not. It's forced into the hands of people who already suffer under the canyon-like wealth gap in America and other countries. It's really depressing!