---
title: 'AI and Creative Work Theft'
date: 2025-09-30
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - case study
  - blog
  - ethics
  - generative ai
---

Incoming rant about bullying independent artists/journalists "for the sake of AI"

**Case Study:**  
['"How Generative AI Works and How it Fails"'](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/f3o5mpn6/release/1?readingCollection=3a6c54f1)

---

This article goes over the intricacies of how AI works, why its so convincing, and why it's not reliable. 

At the end of the article, we are presented with a few topics to encourage further discussion. One of these in particular is something that I have very strong stances on, and I will happily take the opportunity to talk about. 

['*"The use of creative work for training"*'](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/f3o5mpn6/release/1?from=37248&to=37787)

The first question under this topic asks us about the ethics of using the creative output of journalists, writers, photographers, artists, etc. without consent, credit, or compensation. 

I have personal attachment to this question. I have been practicing digital art for 6-7 years now, and I've used the internet to post the things that I've created. Since then, it's very likely that my work has been scraped for AI use without my knowledge. I know for certain that 2 websites that I've posted art to have used it's users images to train their own AI image generation. I've since deactivated my account on both platforms, since it doesn't feel great to have work so blatantly stolen. In terms of protecting themselves, artists are absolutely at a disadvantage. AI is so new, that it's really complicated arguing that AI is stealing your copyrighted materal. Trying to use the legal system is almost out of the question for many independent artists and writers, considering their lack of resources. And supporters of AI will fight tooth and nail to claim that it's not theft, especially if it means that this stolen work benefits them in the long run. Ethically, I find data scraping to be abhorrent. Major social media platforms can easily strongarm their way into making you sign away any images you upload to their AI training, and you're forced to either abandon the community you built there, or let them steal your work. It's a lose-lose situation for the consumer.  

The second question under this topic asks about how someone can go about changing the system. 

This is also frustrating to me, since again, artists and journalists are at such a major disadvantage. Especially in the current state of America, I truly do not believe in the government to make a fair regulation in this matter. I feel like no matter what, corporations and companies will always have the upper hand. They have more influence and more money to bully whoever they want into letting things happen. As much as I wish copyright law was more powerful, it's already so abused in it's current state. And the idea of independently licensing artists' work is just too unrealistic. But the way that things are: content scraping, in my opinion, should be absolutely illegal. I think it abuses independent artists far too much, and it's way too easy to get away with. 

I would like to raise an alternate for further thinking: "If you believe content scraping should be illegal, what should the repercussions be?" Realistically, trying to hunt down potential thousands of harmed parties sounds incredibly difficult. But is there a way that artists should be reimbursed? Should the prosecuted face damages? I'd like to know what people would have to say about something like that. Because honestly, I'm not sure. I feel like I'd struggle balancing practicality with justice.  

Either way, this is a subject I feel very strongly about. And I'm thankful for this assignment to give me a space to rant about it for a little bit. 