---
title: 'Reflection moment'
date: 2025-12-4
permalink: /posts/2025/12/blog-post-12/
tags:
  - case study
  - blog
  - ethics
  - reflection
  - course reflection

---

The semester is wrapping up - I'm gonna talk about my experience with my blog posts.

---

Hey there!

This is going to be a lot different from my other blog posts. This is a course reflection piece, so I'm just going to be answering questions about my experience with the blog posts I've posted throughout the semester. This is just going to be a Q/A format.

1 Superlative Round #1: Choose one blog post and assign it a superlative (e.g., most fun, most challenging, most surprising, most informative, most frustrating). Why did you choose this superlative? What specific features or moments in your post earned it this title?

I'm going to designate Blog Post 5 as "Most Frustrating." You can tell it earned this title because I never actually submitted it. (sorry)

This one was just so time-consuming. I really tried, but I kept zoning out during the video I selected. This was partially due to a medication shortage I was facing, and I just didn't ever get the willpower to finally submit it. That's my bad!

I feel like a video review is so much more difficult for me, strangely enough. Something about knowing how long the video is going to take, and also knowing that I can't just "ctrl + f" quick quotes makes it so much less bearable mentally. I know it probably wouldn't have taken much more time than my other blog posts, but I just couldn't do it. 

---

2 Superlative Round #2: Select a different blog post and choose a new superlative. What stands out about this post compared to the others? How does reflecting on it help you notice changes in your writing or thinking?

I would like to award Blog 10 for "Most Cathartic" 

This one was towards the end of the semester, and I really think that my writing improved from the beginning of the semester to this one. It was both a topic I am passionate about, and I hope that was evident throughout reading it. I felt a weight off my chest after having the space to have my crash-out in the comfort of my own website. 

---

3 Blog Evolution Check: Choose one blog that you significantly revised. What did you change, and why? How did your later knowledge or improved skills influence the revision?

I'm so sorry this one is currently N/A (this should change soon!)

I have work during office hours *and* TA hours, so this has been not possible for a bit. I know I can email, and I'm sorry I haven't. I have so much anxiety sending emails it's not even funny.

---

4 Writing Skills and Growth: A key goal of this course was to help you develop writing skills. In what ways do you feel your writing has improved (or not)? What parts of the blog-writing process were most helpful for your growth? Were there aspects you struggled with?

This reminded me a lot of the writing journals I did in high school, honestly.

Every day we would write for 10 minutes before we got into my ELA course. We would be given prompts, or we could write about whatever we wanted. This gradually started to feel like the same thing, where I could just kinda shut my brain off after reading an article and type. I'm sure it's evident, but I didn't focus much on my grammar or spelling on these. It was kinda nice just dumping my thoughts into a space. 

---

5 Process Comparison: Would you have preferred writing traditional essays instead of blogs? Why or why not? What differences did you notice between writing for an online audience and writing for a typical academic assignment?

I so sincerely hate writing essays.

Objectively: I get good scores on my essays. I've had essay practice drilled into me since I was taking the "advanced" courses in middle school. I almost ended up working for the Writing Desk because I know what I'm doing. But the thing that stopped me is that I hate writing essays. I get so stressed over them that I feel such little joy by the time they're done.  

Blogs on the other hand? I don't feel like I'm writing to an academic audience. I'm not writing to someone that's going to scorn every comma splice I make instead of the content that I'm trying to express. And I think that's really freeing. 

---

6 Patterns and Habits: What common themes, writing habits, or stylistic choices do you notice across your blogs? Did any habits change over the semester?

Again, I didn't pay much attention to my spelling or grammar. I actually write all of these in the GitHub codespace, and my grammar check isn't compatable with VS Code. I don't get the little squiggles when I spell something wrong, or I make a fatal grammar error. 

These are a lot more casual than any other class I've written for. I'm just surprised I didn't curse every other word like I tend to do when writing to my friends in private. I guess this was a good balance between academic and *anarchy*.

---

7 Topics and Themes: Which class topics did you enjoy writing about most, and why? Is there a topic that you wish we had covered in class? What kind of prompts or activities helped you generate ideas most effectively? 

I liked writing about my concerns with AI, especially in a CS space. I feel like online, theres so much praise from "experts" for AI. But being able to talk with people entering the space, and being provided sources that don't just *glaze* LLMs and chatbots? That's so refreshing. 

I liked being able to choose topics from a category. I think that it gave enough guidance so the blog assignment didn't feel overwhelming, but it gave enough freedom to write about something that I am interested in. And I think that passion or connection to a topic really makes a positive impact on the quality of the writing you get out of it. 

---

8 Knowledge Integration: Did writing blogs help you understand course concepts more deeply? Can you identify a moment where something “clicked” because you had to write about it?

Blog Post 7 I think was super insightful in relation to the second half of this question. It's not something that I think is mentioned very much, and after reading it, I really became aware of the repercussions of Western-focused views in the tech space in general. There are so many groups that are ignored, and I didn't think about the scope of that before.

As for the first half of the question: I think generally writing about things helps people for just about anything. Being told to write your thoughts down kinda forces you to flesh them out more thoroughly than if you are just told to read about it. It's why I value peer-to-peer discussion so much in education: you build on others, but you also build on yourself when you talk about things. Even literally right now, I'm developing my thinking on that subject. That's weird to think about.  

---

9 Future Use of Your Website: Now that you have your own blog and website, what kindsof content do you imagine posting after this course? Do you see yourself continuing the blog? Why or why not?

Having my own website is honestly pretty exciting. I hope to gradually transform it into something a lot more personal over time. I have a plan to upload my digital artwork somewhere here since it's really difficult to find a space for that these days. I mean, part of my case study is actually based on the fact the TOS for Twitter and DeviantArt changed, and now I don't have those places to put my art anymore. Having a website is a good solution :D

As far as my blog goes: Maybe? I don't know if I have anything particularly interesting to talk about. At least not anything I think an internet audience would want to read about. But maybe.

---

10 Future Writing Identity: What kind of writer do you see yourself becoming beyond this class? Are there types of writing (creative, academic, technical, reflective) that you’d like to explore more?

I love creative writing. I always have: since the beginning of the semester I've had a personal writing project I've been doing with some close friends of mine. I haven't had much time with everything ramping up at the end of the semester, but I hope that changes soon!

I think that journaling and casual writing is pretty healthy for me. It's something my therapist advised me to do, and it's worked pretty well. So I see myself continuing that. 

---

11 Personal Writing Goals: If you were to set one writing goal for yourself for next semester or next year, what would it be? What steps could you realistically take to move toward that goal?

I want to be more consistent with my journaling. Maybe not online (that sounds like a lot to commit to putting online), but I have my little journal for a reason. I should probably use it, you know?

I have a habit tracker in my academic planner. I think if I write myself notes to journal like I have notes to water my plant, I'll actually remember to do it. 